**Chapter 20: International trade**

The first wave of globalization started in the nineteenth century and
lasted up to the beginning of World War I. Over that time, global
exports as a share of global gross domestic product (GDP) rose from less
than 1% of GDP in 1820 to 9% of GDP in 1913. As the Nobel Prize-winning
economist Paul Krugman of Princeton University wrote in 1995:

> It is a late-twentieth-century conceit that we invented the global
> economy just yesterday. In fact, world markets achieved an impressive
> degree of integration during the second half of the nineteenth
> century. Indeed, if one wants a specific date for the beginning of a
> truly global economy, one might well choose 1869, the year in which
> both the Suez Canal and the Union Pacific railroad were completed. By
> the eve of the First World War steamships and railroads had created
> markets for standardized commodities, like wheat and wool, that were
> fully global in their reach. Even the global flow of information was
> better than modern observers, focused on electronic technology, tend
> to realize: the first submarine telegraph cable was laid under the
> Atlantic in 1858, and by 1900 all of the world's major economic
> regions could effectively communicate instantaneously.

This first wave of globalization crashed to a halt early in the
twentieth century. World War I severed many economic connections. During
the Great Depression of the 1930s, many nations misguidedly tried to fix
their own economies by reducing foreign trade with others. World War II
further hindered international trade. Global flows of goods and
financial capital were rebuilt only slowly after World War II. It was
not until the early 1980s that global economic forces again became as
important, relative to the size of the world economy, as they were
before World War I.

**20.1 Absolute and Comparative Advantage**

The American statesman Benjamin Franklin (1706--1790) once wrote, "No
nation was ever ruined by trade." Many economists would express their
attitude toward international trade in an even more positive manner. The
evidence that international trade confers overall benefits on economies
is strong. Trade has accompanied economic growth in the United States
and around the world. Many of the national economies that have shown the
most rapid growth in the last fifty years---for example, Japan, South
Korea, China, and India---have done so by dramatically orienting their
economies toward international trade. There is no modern example of a
country that has shut itself off from world trade and yet prospered. To
understand the benefits of trade, or why we trade in the first place, we
need to understand the concepts of comparative and absolute advantage.

In 1817, David Ricardo, a businessman, economist, and member of the
British Parliament, wrote a treatise called *On the Principles of
Political Economy and Taxation*. In this treatise, Ricardo argued that
specialization and free trade benefit all trading partners, even those
that may be relatively inefficient. To see what he meant, we must be
able to distinguish between absolute and comparative advantage.

A country has an **absolute advantage** over another country in the
production a good if it uses fewer resources to produce that good (or,
assuming equal access to resources, if the country can produce more of
the good). Absolute advantage can be the result of a country's natural
endowment. For example, extracting oil in Saudi Arabia is pretty much
just a matter of "drilling a hole." Producing oil in other countries can
require considerable exploration and costly technologies for drilling
and extraction---if they have any oil at all. The United States has some
of the richest farmland in the world, making it easier to grow corn and
wheat than in many other countries. Guatemala and Colombia have climates
especially suited for growing coffee. Chile and Zambia have some of the
world's richest copper mines. When each country has a product others
need and can produce it with fewer resources, it is easy to imagine all
parties benefitting from trade. However, thinking about trade just in
terms of geography and absolute advantage is incomplete. Successful
trading actually occurs because of comparative advantages.

Recall from chapter 2 that a country has a **comparative advantage**
when it can produce a good at a lower **opportunity cost** than some
other country. That is, the country with the comparative advantage gives
up less of good *A* to produce good *B*. The next subsection develops
absolute and comparative advantage in greater detail and relates them to
trade.

**20.1.1 A numerical example of absolute and comparative advantage**

Consider a hypothetical world with two countries, Saudi Arabia and the
United States, and two products, oil and corn. Further, assume that
consumers in both countries desire both of these goods. These goods are
*homogeneous*, meaning that consumers and producers cannot tell the
difference between corn or oil from either country. All corn producers
supply the same corn, and all oil producers supply the same oil. Of
course, both countries must have all of the resources for producing oil
and corn, but we will imagine that labor is the only required resource,
which we will count as "labor hours." Table 20.1 gives the barrels of
oil and the bushels of corn that can be produced by each country in one
hour.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Country                 Oil (hours per barrel) Corn (hours per bushel)
  ----------------------- ---------------------- -------------------------
  Saudi Arabia            1                      4

  United States           2                      1
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Table 20.1** *How many hours it takes to produce oil and corn*

Saudi Arabia has an absolute advantage in oil production. While it takes
the U.S. two hours to produce a barrel of oil, Saudi Arabia can do it in
one hour. The United States, however, has an absolute advantage in corn
production. The U.S. can produce a bushel of corn in one hour; whereas,
the same bushel takes Saudi Arabia four hours.

Let's also say that Saudi Arabia and the United States each have 100
labor hours available per week (for instance, maybe each has ten workers
who do ten hours of work per week or five who do 20---or any combination
that adds up to 100 hours). So, if Saudi Arabia uses all 100 labor hours
to produce oil, it can produce 100 barrels per week. If it uses all 100
labor hours to produce corn, it can produce 25 bushels per week. (In
Saudi Arabia, 1 bushel takes 4 hours to produce, and so with 100 hours,
25 can be produced.) The U.S., meanwhile, can produce 50 barrels of oil
if it uses all of its labor hours for that purpose, and it can produce
100 bushels of corn if it uses all 100 hours there. These values and
some of the possible combinations of both goods that each country can
produce with its 100 labor hours are listed in table 20.2.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Saudi Arabia                        United States (100    
  (100 labor                          labor hours)          
  hours)                                                    
  ------------- --------------------- --------------------- ---------------
  oil (barrels) corn (bushels)        oil (barrels)         corn (bushels)

  100           0                     50 (100 hours)        0

  **60**        **10 (40 hours)**     40 (80 hours)         20

  40            15 (60 hours)         **20 (40 hours)**     **60**

  20            20 (80 hours)         10 (20 hours)         80

  0             25 (100 hours)        0                     100
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Table 20.2**

As you may recall from chapter 2, the **production possibility frontier
(PPF)** is the curve that represents all of the possible combinations of
two goods that a country can produce, given its limited resources. The
production possibility frontiers for Saudi Arabia and the United States
are given in figure [1](#CNX_Econ_C33_010).[^1]

![Chart, line chart Description automatically
generated](media/image1.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.625in"}

> **Figure 20.1.** The production possibility frontiers for Saudi Arabia
> (left) and the United States (right).
>
> \(a\) If it produces only oil, then Saudi Arabia can produce 100
> barrels of oil and zero bushels of corn (point A). Alternatively, if
> it produces only corn, it can produce 25 bushels of corn and zero
> barrels of oil (point B). It can also produce other combinations of
> oil and corn if it wants to consume both goods, such as at point C.
> Here, it produces (and consumes) 60 barrels of oil, leaving 40 labor
> hours that are spent on the production of 10 bushels of corn.
>
> \(b\) If the United States produces only oil, it can produce, at most,
> 50 barrels. This is point A′. At the other extreme, it can produce 100
> bushels of corn and no oil (point B′). Other combinations of both oil
> and corn are possible, such as point C′.
>
> All points to the right of each country's PPF are impossible for that
> country to produce, given its current level of resources and
> technology.

Presumably, Saudi and U.S. consumers desire both oil and corn. Let's say
that before trade occurs, both countries produce and consume at point C
and C′. Thus, before trade, the Saudi Arabian economy will devote 60
labor hours to producing oil, which will yield 60 barrels of oil (in
bold on the left side of table 20.2). With the remaining 40 labor hour
(since it needs four hours to produce a bushel of corn), it can produce
only 10 bushels. To be at point C′, the U.S. devotes 40 labor hours to
producing 20 barrels of oil, and its remaining labor hours are used to
produce 60 bushels of corn (in bold on the right side of table 20.2).

Now, we want to think about the opportunity cost for each country of
producing each good. Let's say that Saudi Arabia is producing only oil:
100 barrels of oil and no bushels of corn. If it, then, begins producing
10 bushels of corn, how much oil production does it give up? In this
scenario, it will go from 100 barrels of oil to 60, and so it is giving
up 40 barrels of oil. Hence, for Saudi Arabia, 40 barrels of oil = 10
bushels of corn, or 4 barrels of oil = 1 bushel of corn. In other words,
the cost (that is, the opportunity cost) of producing 1 bushel of corn
is 4 barrels of oil. (It gives up 4 barrels of oil every time it
produces a bushel of corn.)

On the other hand, if we imagine that Saudi Arabia is producing only
corn, and then it begins producing 20 barrels of oil, how much corn is
it giving up when it makes this switch? Five bushels of corn---it was
producing 25 and now it's producing 20. Hence 5 bushels of corn = 20
barrels of oil, or ¼ bushel of corn = 1 barrel of oil. In other words,
the cost of producing 1 barrel of oil, for Saudi Arabia, is only ¼
bushel of corn. (It gives up only ¼ bushel of corn every time it
produces a barrel of oil.) These values and the opportunity costs for
the United States are listed in table 20.3.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Country        opportunity cost of          opportunity cost of
                 producing 1 unit of oil      producing 1 unit of corn
  -------------- ---------------------------- ----------------------------
  Saudi Arabia   **¼ unit of corn**           4 units of oil

  United States  2 units of corn              **½ unit of oil**
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

> **Table 20.3** The lower opportunity costs are in bold. Saudi Arabia
> has a comparative advantage producing oil. (It can do so for a lower
> cost: .25 vs. 2 bushels of corn.) And the United States has a
> comparative advantage producing corn. (It can do so for a lower cost:
> .50 vs 4 barrels of oil.)

We defined comparative advantage in terms of the opportunity cost of
producing goods. The country with the comparative advantage in the
production of a good is the one that incurs the lower cost (that is, the
lower opportunity cost) to produce it. Looking at table 20.3, which
country can produce 1 barrel of oil at the lower opportunity cost? Saudi
Arabia. When it produces a barrel of oil, it only gives up ¼ bushel of
corn, while the United States gives up 2 bushels of corn. Hence, Saudi
Arabia has a comparative advantage in oil production.

On the other hand, for the United States, the opportunity cost of
producing a bushel of corn is only ½ barrel of oil. This is a much lower
opportunity cost than Saudi Arabia's. (Saudi Arabia gives up 4 barrels
of oil to produce a bushel of corn.) So, the United States has a
comparative advantage in corn production.

In this example, there is a symmetry between absolute and comparative
advantage. Saudi Arabia can produce more oil with its 100 labor hours,
and so it has an absolute advantage in oil production. It also gives up
the least in terms of corn production to produce oil, and so it has a
comparative advantage in oil production. At the same time, the United
States has an absolute and a comparative advantage in corn production.
Such symmetry is not always the case, as we will see in section 20.2.
Sometimes a country can have an absolute advantage in the production of
both goods. It won't, however, have a comparative advantage for both.
But, before we examine that situation, we must investigate the gains
that these two countries will get from trading with each other.

**20.1.2 Gains from trade**

In the previous section, we put the actual production of oil and corn
for Saudi Arabia and the United States at points C and C′. Saudi Arabia
produces 60 barrels of oil per week and 10 bushels of corn, and the
United States produces 20 barrels of oil per week and 60 bushels of
corn. Now, let's say that they decide to trade.

What will happen if they trade 20 bushels of corn for 20 barrels of oil?
That is, the United States gives 20 bushels of corn to Saudi Arabia in
exchange for 20 barrels of oil. The result is in table 20.4. Of course,
the United States will end up with less corn (and more oil) and Saudi
Arabia will end up with less oil (and more corn). After making this
particular trade, however, both countries are better off because they
now have a combination of oil and corn that they couldn't achieve on
their own. In other words, both have a combination of these goods that
is outside (i.e., to the right of) their production possibilities
frontier. (See figure 20.2 for Saudi Arabia.) This is an important
result because it shows that trading can make both countries better off
than they otherwise would be.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  before                                    after trade                         
  trade                                                                         
  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
              oil\        corn                          oil\        corn        better
              (barrels)   (bushels)                     (barrels)   (bushels)   off?

  Saudi       60          10                Saudi       40          30          ✓
  Arabia                                    Arabia                              

  United      20          60                United      40          40          ✓
  States                                    States                              
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> **Table 20.4** Before trading, each country has (and consumes) what it
> produces. After trading 20 barrels of oil for 20 bushels of corn, they
> each have (and can consume) what is on the right.

![Chart, line chart Description automatically
generated](media/image2.jpeg){width="4.875in"
height="3.7399989063867016in"}

> **Figure 20.2** Saudi Arabia's production possibilities frontier.
> Prior to trading, Saudi Arabia was at point C (10 bushels of corn and
> 60 barrels of oil). After trading, they are at point D (30 bushels of
> corn and 40 barrels of oil). Of course, it's up to Saudi Arabia to
> decide if D is a combination that they want (that is, to decide
> whether it achieves *allocative efficiency*). But, from our economic
> point of view, Saudi Arabia has gained from this trade because they
> now have a combination of corn and oil that they couldn't achieve on
> their own.
>
> *Deciding what to trade*
>
> Twenty bushels of corn for 20 barrels of oil is one trade that makes
> both countries better off, but it's not the only one. In general, both
> countries would set the limits described here, and then negotiation to
> achieve the exact combination of goods, post-trade, that they want.
> Here are some guidelines for thinking about amounts that will make
> both countries better off.
>
> 1\. If the United States produced 100 bushels of corn and traded all
> 100 bushels for 50 barrels of oil (2 to 1), it would end up no better
> off than if it didn't trade and produced only oil.
>
> 2\. So, when it trades, it wants a better ratio than 2:1. That is, it
> wants to give up less than 2 bushels of corn for every barrel of oil
> that it gets.
>
> 3\. If Saudi Arabia produced 100 barrels of oil and traded all of it
> for 25 bushels of corn (4 to 1), it would end up no better off than if
> it didn't trade and produced only corn.
>
> 4\. So, when it trades, it wants a better ratio than 4:1. It wants to
> give up less than 4 barrels of oil for every bushel of corn that it
> gets.
>
> 5\. Those are some boundaries, but let's think of this as just selling
> and buying oil.
>
> 6\. Saudi Arabia will *sell* 1 barrel of oil for any "price" greater
> than ¼ bushel of corn.
>
> 7\. The United States will *buy* 1 barrel oil for any "price" less
> than 2 bushels of corn.
>
> 8\. So, the price of 1 barrel of oil must be between slightly more
> than ¼ and slightly less than 2 bushels of corn.

**20.1.3 Specializing**

Since both countries can end up with both goods, corn and oil, after
trading, it is not necessary for them to produce both themselves.
Rather, each can focus on producing the good for which it has a
comparative advantage. Then, they can trade for the other. So, Saudi
Arabia produces only oil: 100 barrels. And the United States produces
only corn: 100 bushels. Then, they trade. Let's say, that they trade 40
barrels of oil for 50 bushels of corn.[^2]

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  before                                    after trade                         
  trade                                                                         
  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
              oil\        corn                          oil\        corn        better
              (barrels)   (bushels)                     (barrels)   (bushels)   off?

  Saudi       100         0                 Saudi       60          50          ✓
  Arabia                                    Arabia                              

  United      0           100               United      40          50          ✓
  States                                    States                              
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> **Table 20.5** Before trading, each country is producing only the good
> for which it has a comparative advantage (and, in this example, an
> absolute advantage). After trading 40 barrels of oil for 50 bushels of
> corn, they each have (and can consume) what is on the right.

Again, we see that, after the trade, both countries have a combination
of oil and corn that is to the right of their production possibilities
frontier. Hence, both are better off that they would have been if they
didn't trade and produced (for their own consumption only) a combination
on their production possibilities frontier.

**20.2 When a country has an absolute advantage in all goods**

What happens if one country has an absolute advantage in everything?
This is typical for high-income countries that often have well-educated
workers, technologically advanced equipment, and the most up-to-date
production processes. These high-income countries can produce all
products with fewer resources than a low-income country. If the
high-income country is more productive across the board, will there
still be gains from trade? The answer is "yes." Even when one country
has an absolute advantage in all products, trade can still benefit both
sides. This is because gains from trade come from countries specializing
in the good for which they have a comparative advantage.

**20.2.1 Production possibilities and comparative advantage**

Let's say that Italy and Brazil both produce jackets and pants, and
again, we will assume that these are *homogeneous* goods. All of the
jackets and all of the pants produced in both countries are the same
style and of the same quality. Four Italian workers can produce 1,000
jackets per week, while it takes five Brazilian workers to produce 1,000
per week. And it takes only one Italian worker to produce 1,000 pairs of
pants per week; in Brazil, it takes four workers.

Let's also say that both countries have 40 workers. Thus, they can
produce the combinations of jackets and pants that are given in table
20.6. Here, we see that Italy has an absolute advantage in jacket
production---with an equivalent number of workers, they can make 10,000
per week as compared to 8,000 for Brazil. And it also has an absolute
advantage in pants production---they can produce 40,000 per week, while
Brazil can only produce 10,000. Italy doesn't have a comparative
advantage in both, however.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Italy                                    Brazil              
  ------------------ --------------------- ------------------- ----------
  jackets            pants                 jackets             pants

  (40 workers)       0                     \(40\) 8,000        0
  10,000                                                       

  (30 workers) 7,500 \(10\) 10,000         \(30\) 6,000        \(10\)
                                                               2,500

  (20 workers) 5,000 \(20\) 20,000         \(20\) 4,000        \(20\)
                                                               5,000

  (14 workers) 3,500 \(26\) 26,000         \(15\) 3,000        \(25\)
                                                               6,250

  (10 workers) 2,500 \(30\) 30,000         \(10\) 2,000        \(30\)
                                                               7,500

  (6 workers) 1,500  \(34\) 34,000         \(5\) 1,000         \(35\)
                                                               8,750

  0                  \(40\) 40,000         0                   \(40\)
                                                               10,000
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

**table 20.6**

![Chart, line chart Description automatically
generated](media/image3.png){width="6.84in" height="3.39in"}

**figure 20.3**

If Italy is producing only pants, then it can make 40,000 per week. If
it, then, switches to producing 30,000, it gains 2,500 jackets. Hence,
the cost (i.e., opportunity cost) of producing those 2,500 jackets is
10,000 pants. 2,500 jackets = 10,000 pants, or 1 jacket = 4 pants. At
the same time, if Italy is producing only jackets, it can make 10,000
per week. If it, then, switches to producing 5,000 jackets, it will gain
20,000 pairs of pants. The cost of producing those 20,000 pants is 5,000
jackets. 20,000 pants = 5,000 jackets, or 1 pair of pants = ¼ jacket.
These and Brazil's opportunity costs are given in table 20.7.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Country        opportunity cost of          opportunity cost of
                 producing 1 jacket           producing 1 pair of pants
  -------------- ---------------------------- ----------------------------
  Italy          4 pants                      **.25 jacket**

  Brazil         **1.25 pants**               .80 jacket
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

> **Table 20.7** The lower opportunity costs are in bold. Hence, Brazil
> has a comparative advantage producing jackets. (It can do so for a
> lower cost: 1.25 vs. 4 pants.) And Italy has a comparative advantage
> producing pants. (It can do so for a lower cost: .25 vs .80 pants.)

Now, we see that the "cost" of producing 1 jacket is much higher for the
Italy (4 pants) than it is for Brazil (1.25 pants). Brazil has a
comparative advantage in jacket production. Italy, however, has a
comparative advantage in pants production. It only gives up ¼ jacket for
every pair of pants that produces. Brazil, meanwhile, gives up 4/5
jacket every time that it produces a pair of pants. Producing pants has
a higher opportunity cost for Brazil.

So, these two countries decide to trade. Even though Italy has an
absolute advantage in the production of jackets and pants, both
countries will specialize in the good for which they have a
*comparative* advantage. **Italy will produce only pants, and Brazil
will produce only jackets.** When we were examining the example of trade
between Saudi Arabia and the United States, we said that a country will
*sell* a good for any "price" that is *higher* than their opportunity
cost. At the same time, a country will *buy* a good for any "price" that
is *lower* than their opportunity cost. Focusing on pants, we get these
boundaries for the trade:

> Italy will sell a pair of pants for any price that is higher than .25
> jackets.
>
> Brazil will buy a pair of pants for any price that is lower than .80
> jackets.

We will, again, take a value in the middle and set the price at 1 pant
for .50 jacket. And let's say that, using this price, they decide to
trade 10,000 pants for 5,000 jackets. The combinations of both goods
that they will have after trading are given on the right in table 20.8.
If you consult the two graphs in figure 20.3, you will see that these
combinations are to the right of both country's production possibilities
frontier. Hence (even though Italy has an absolute advantage in the
production of both goods), by specializing in the production of the good
for which they have a comparative advantage and then trading, both
countries end up with a combination that they could not achieve on their
own.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  before                               after trade                    
  trade                                                               
  ----------- --------- -------- ----- ----------- --------- -------- --------
              jackets   pants                      jackets   pants    better
                                                                      off?

  Italy       0         40,000         Italy       5,000     30,000   ✓

  Brazil      8,000     0              Brazil      3,000     10,000   ✓
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**table 20.8**

[^1]: Recall that, in chapter 2, we said that we typically expect a PPF
    to be convex. This is because, as resources are moved toward the
    production of one good and away from the production of the other,
    the resulting increases and decreases in production are not
    proportional, especially if a country gets close to using almost all
    of its resources to produce one of the two goods. Rather than being
    convex, however, the PPFs that we examine in this chapter will be
    straight lines. This is not realistic---it assumes that all
    resources are perfectly interchangeable---but it will make the
    analysis in this chapter much simpler without altering the concepts
    *absolute* and *comparative advantage*.

[^2]: As explained in the box that is at the end of the previous
    subsection, both countries will agree to sell and buy oil for a
    "price" that is between (*a*) slightly more than .25 bushel of corn
    and (*b*) slightly less than 2 bushels of corn. So, simplifying a
    bit, they might agree to sell and buy 1 barrel of oil for .5, .75,
    1, 1.25, 1.5, or 1.75 bushels of corn. Picking one of the values in
    the middle, we have 1 barrel of oil for 1.25 bushels of corn, which,
    multiplied by 40, becomes 40 barrels of oil for 50 bushels of corn.
